This week on Planet Money, Mary Childs and Michael Lewis talk about sports gambling. Plus, we talk about NPR Plus, a new product that we will give you to incentivize your donation. We'll also talk about Tae-mi-so-de-k-and zombie mortgages and wife-lying sucks. In the 1970s, Las Vegas was the only state where people could legally gamble on sports. The sports gambling market in the United States was shady but it had its unwritten rules. We're about to meet a person who will discover that he can outsmart the system. In the late 1970s the Nevada gaming control board tossed the mob out of Vegas and out of sports gambling. By the early 1980s everyone knew that the weather and the size of ball parks had big effects on baseball scores. Rupis Peabody is who crossed Roxy's bridge. He studied statistics and built models that predicted the performance of athletes. Rupis Peabody started by finding these edges and kind of stumbled into gambling. He then found Roxie's sports analytics company, Las Vegas Sports Consultants. Rupis wanted to see if he could take things a step further and use people's own biases against them. Ruthie's Peabody recently of Yale is no one's idea of a hustler. He's too sweet, natured and even tempered and way too open to telling other people about the stuff he's learned. Ruthie thinks he might have an edge. And people in and around Roxy's firm think that maybe he's right. Rufus can bet on the PGA tour and PGA band. His model puts those odds much higher than the bookies odds. He makes dozens of similar bets. Bet's where his model tells him that the bookie are giving him better odds than they should. Rufus Peabody used data to predict what athletes were going to do. The new bookies were not like the old bookies. They only wanted to take certain bets. Michael Lewis: Americans are making stupid or, and stupid or sports bets. Lewis: We've yet to hit the limit like how much worse Americans will get at sports betting. He says there will be these social problems bubbling along while this industry booms.