The act of smelling a perfume is like hearing a full orchestra. In order to actually smell it, your nose has to parse through thousands of different molecules, translate them, and then transmit it to your brain so that you can smell what you recognize as your favorite scent. The fabric of our existence, the literally the threads that weave together, how we feel within the world, both with other people, with our past experiences and fundamentally with ourselves is deeply, deeply connected to our sense of smell. We're going to explore how affection actually works from our nose to our brain. How smell has been used to legally divide us. And finally, how harnessing oursense of smell and memory can make us all into time travelers. Scientists didn't understand exactly how the nose and brain were able to process and make sense of the wide range of chemicals we breathe in. Rachel Hurz says the Nobel Prize made Linda Buck into a rock star in the science world. Smell is a deeply personal thing. It's a conduit for our deepest memories and thoughts. Smell has played an important role in shaping our society in deciding who does and does not belong. Rosetta Stone is the perfect app to achieve your language learning goals no matter how busy your schedule gets. Sense of smell allows animals including skunks to detect danger and navigate their environments. We've also ascribed emotions and perceptions to certain smells. Historians should examine all of the senses, says sensory historian Mark Smith. Smith: Segregation in the U.S. was founded in part on an argument based on racist perceptions of smell. Scent memories are bringing back a very discreet episode that's, you know, fully fleshed out as one moment in time. When we smell something familiar, we instantly all back then you eyes a close and you're on this physical one. The smell of pine cones and almonds transports urnistine back in time to her grandmother's kitchen in South Africa. The smell of the soil in Constantia, Cape Town is a place of such comfort for urnistine's family. The brutal system of apartheid was literally obliterating her sense of smell, she says. In the 1980s and 90s, the anti-apartheid movement was growing in Grassy Park, South Africa. Riot police were daily presence and the air always smelled like burning tires and tear gas. To this day, consonsha is still a predominantly white and incredibly wealthy suburb. Rambtina Arablui: I recently gave birth to my first child. She's made me think about smell in a totally different way. Rhonda Befeta: What smells do I want to pass down to my daughter?