 This message comes from Mattress firm. Ready to get quality sleep this holiday season? Mattress firm offers a premium selection of mattresses so you can get your best sleep ever, even through the holiday stress. Get matched at Mattress firm's semi-annual sale and clearance and sleep at night. You're listening to throughline from NPR. I'm Ronda Befatra. And I'm Ronda Befatra. For years, the Chinese government has been detaining and imprisoning hundreds of thousands of ethnic Uyghurs and other Muslim groups in the Xinjiang region of China. The US and some European countries are calling it a quote, cultural genocide. And in 2021, NPR's China correspondent Emily Fang started following one Uyghur family, the Ku-Char family, whose lives were torn apart by this crackdown. Three years later, she's still reporting on them, what she found became the Black Gate, a three-part series on NPR's embedded podcast. Today, we're sharing the first part of that series with you. And you can find the rest right now over in the embedded feed. Embedded is NPR's home for serialized documentary storytelling. Here's NPR's Emily Fang to take it away. Three years ago, I had a long conversation with a man named Abdullah Tef Ku-Char. And his story was unlike any that I'd ever heard. He's Uyghur, a Turkic ethnic minority in Western China that mostly practices Islam. And he told me that for almost two years, he lost all contact with his wife and children. Abdullah Tef told me it all started one December evening in 2017. This is how he remembers it. He'd been chatting with his wife, Mariam, on the phone. He was an Istanbul, and she was back in China at their home in Xinjiang, a region in Western China where most Uyghurs live. Mariam was exhausted and on edge because Chinese government miners, they call themselves relatives, have been keeping a close eye on her every day. The relatives would come and live with us sometimes. They would even sleep there at night and have breakfast with us in the morning. So it was only in the evenings, right before bedtime, when Mariam usually had some privacy. She would wash the kids and then she would call me. But as I chatted, Mariam heard a knock on the door. It was 10 p.m. Abdullah Tef felt a surge of fear. They don't arrest people during the day. They only arrest them at night. And on the other end of the line, he could also hear Mariam's fear. She was so scared, but she told me she had to open the door. So she put the cell phone away. I heard some noises, the sound of something breaking. After that, silence. Abdullah Tef tried calling Mariam back. Nothing. So he frantically called family. Mariam's cousins and sisters who lived nearby in Xinjiang. They got to his home early the next morning. That kid said the customer was a bulowat. They found my apartment was a mess. Everything was upside down. And our two kids were in shock by themselves at home. A relative swent to the police station. They knew Mariam was there, but they were not allowed to meet her. The police told them that Mariam had been arrested. So Abdullah Tef's cousins decided to take in the Kuchara's young children. Their son, Lutfala, who was just four years old, and daughter isu who was six. My cousins took care of our children, but then the cousins got arrested. So my sister-in-law took our children, and then she too was arrested. After that, Abdullah Tef lost all contact with his family. He had no idea where Mariam and the children were or what had happened to them. Years later, I reached out to the police in Xinjiang about Mariam, but got no answers. And at the time, China still had strict COVID restrictions, which made reporting in the region basically impossible. I've been reporting on the arrests and detentions in Xinjiang since 2018. And I've heard from literally dozens of Uyghurs core desperately searching for family there. China has been methodically attempting to dismantle their culture by imprisoning the adults and putting children in state schools. That's what Abdullah Tef feared had happened to his family. So he decided to try to save them against all odds. We'll be right back. This message comes from Schwab. It's easy to invest in ideas you believe in with Schwab investing themes, like online music and videos, artificial intelligence, and electric vehicles. Choose from over 40 customizable themes, more at Schwab.com. Support for this podcast and the following message come from arm. In the latest episode of their podcast, Tech Unheard, arm CEO Renee Haas asked Palantiers head of defense business, Mike Gallagher, if leaders are born or made. Recognizing everybody has different strengths and weaknesses and different gifts that are in some sense innate by and large. I still think leaders are made. I think the challenge is adapting timeless principles of leadership to your own unique personality. Like I would never be the hardcore drill sergeant type. That's just not my personality. I'm a bit more collaborative, professorial. And so I had to adapt kind of the Marine Corps vision of leadership to my own unique personality and innate traits at that makes sense. That was like a jaw dropping moment when I realized what it means to be a leader, like you have to take ownership of those under your command. Totally and I agree with you. I think there are qualities we're all born with, but we also have the ability to adapt and be made and learn, etc. etc. listen to Tech Unheard, wherever you get your podcasts. The future of AI is built on arm. This message comes from Robin's burger. A pro might take an hour to finish a jigsaw puzzle, but can you guess how long it takes to create one of Robin's burger's classic puzzles made in Germany? If you guessed a week, you got it. Every die, the metal stencil used to cut the puzzle pieces takes over 160 hours to handcraft and shape. Visit robinsburger.com to discover countless quality jigsaw puzzles from 24 to over 40,000 pieces. Support for NPR and the following message come from the Lemelson Foundation, dedicated to improving lives through invention, innovation, and climate action. Optular teeth co-charnell lives full time in Istanbul, Turkey. Still, it took him time and courage before he could tell a story. It's a traumatic experience for him because the Chinese stay actively intimidating its wakers, even those outside of China. At first, Optular teeth didn't want to talk to me. He was worried that talking could risk the safety of those he loves in China. At least one powerful person you'll hear from in our final episode even tried to convince him not to speak out. Those challenges are why reporting in Xinjiang is so hard. There's an enduring and secretive Chinese police state that even reaches into other countries. But ultimately, Optular teeth decided that speaking out could garner attention and maybe pressure China to help his family. In the second part of the story, we'll hear just what Optular teeth went through to try to free his wife and kids. But first, it's important to understand how things got to that point. In 1949, Chinese troops marched into Xinjiang and declared it part of the new Communist China. They promised autonomy for the Uyghur. The same pledge made to the Tibetans. In the 1930s and 40s, Uyghurs and other ethnic groups had resisted Chinese occupation. They wanted their own nation state. Optular teeth could charge grandparents for part of that independence movement. My grandfather joined the war and was even the right-hand man of Kujanias. Hoja Nias, a famous Uyghur leader. But after Communist China took control, the Kujara family history of resistance became a political stain. Optular teeth's father wasn't allowed to attend university until he joined the Kujara's party and gave up Islam. After my father finished his education in China, he started to drink alcohol and he didn't let my mother pray. Because of these differences between my father and mother's families, they were fighting almost all the time. Optular teeth were members constant conflict at home between his parents. Finally, his father sued his mother for a divorce. He was forced to appear against his wife in court. It was a horrible public affair. During the proceedings, Optular teeth's father turned over his mother's prayer rug as evidence of restrict Muslim faith. Later, he abandoned the family. Optular teeth's mother decided to leave China permanently. In 1986, she took Optular teeth and his older brother, Optular, cheap and moved to Turkey. The boys became Turkish citizens. There are now an estimated 50,000 Uyghurs living in Turkey because the language and culture are so similar. But the Kujara brothers couldn't leave China behind completely. They still have family and friends in Xinjiang. And even from afar, they could see the economy was slowly taking off. In 1990, when they were in their early 20s, the brothers opened up some rest drugs in Xinjiang and later a textile export firm. China was still enforcing religious and political controls over Uyghurs. But as Optular teeth put it, it did not happen all at once. The oppression of Kujors was going on for many years. But the Chinese authorities did not target everyone in one day. Maybe I was too young or ignorant. But at the time, I did not notice. Throughout the 90s, as their businesses grew, the brothers began to feel hopeful. Maybe China was changing. Maybe this could be home again. And there was another reason for Optular teeth's optimism. He met Muryim Ahmed. She was from his hometown. We are most from the city of Okuncha, but we met at a party in Urimchi. Optular teeth says they'd hang out at his restaurant in Urimchi, Xinjiang's capital. It was a place where transplants from Kujua like to go and eat. Optular teeth from Muryim were married in 1998. After their marriage, Optular teeth says he tried to convince Muryim to move to Turkey with him and trade in her Chinese passport for a Turkish one. But she said no. I was born here and my home is in China. She always loved her country, so she didn't want to leave it. She didn't want to leave behind her Chinese nationality. So Optular teeth tried splitting his time between Turkey and China. A few months in Istanbul, then half a year in Xinjiang with Muryim, which worked because China was trying to grow the economy and it wasn't very strict about businessmen coming in and out. But that brief window of openness in the 1990s quickly ended after September 11th, 2001. It's a 52 here in New York. I'm Brian Bumble. We understand that there has been a plane crash on the southern tip of Manhattan. You're looking at the United States. A 9-11 terrorist struck the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. The attacks changed the world. And although Muryim and Optular teeth didn't know it at the time, the attacks kicked off a series of dramatic changes in China that would eventually lead to Muryim's arrest. It began with Chinese authorities interrogating Optular teeth every time he arrived from Turkey. They would ask, what are you doing? Who are you talking to in Turkey? How are you making money? I met basically every police officer in Urimchi. When I got to Kucha my hometown, they even asked me what is my older brother doing in Turkey? How many children he has and what his children are doing? The US war on terror had given China an opportunity to suggest that perhaps it too had a terrorism problem on its hands. Part of the issue was what was happening in Xinjiang. Despite Chinese controls, Uighur culture and Islam were having a resurgence. Ornate mosques were replacing old shabby ones. Bookstand started selling DVDs about the meaning of Islam and many people began to pray five times a day. China does not like this. It begins to publicly blame historical ethnic tensions on Islamic extremism. In 2002, Chinese authorities claimed that Uighur militants had been behind more than 200 terrorist attacks between 1990 and 2001, and it begins cracking down on Uighurs who openly practice their faith. Kalbanur, a young Uighur mother, she asked that I not use her last name, was living in the Xinjiang city of Kashgar as the crackdown's intensified. Kashgar was known for its Uighur culture and religious expression. Kalbanur told me how authorities began to harass her family. Our family was clearly religious. My husband prayed five times a day so officials would control us. They would visit us at night regularly and find any excuse to punish us. Every time anything happened in Kashgar city or neighboring cities, like a minor uprising or protest. Even if it was far away, the local police station would call us and the other religious families, pick us up and bring us to the police station where we would be interrogated or just kept there for up to five days for propaganda lessons. The police knew we had nothing to do with this, but they would interrogate us anyways. Uighur said this kind of treatment was widespread. Uighur said they were passed over for state jobs and paid less than their Han Chinese counterparts, China's majority ethnic group. Chinese officials say Uighurs have more economic opportunity under communist rule. Still, I remember when I first moved to China, I was shocked to see Uighur acquaintances turned away by hotels and taxis who just wouldn't take Uighurs. And as more Chinese state companies and Han Chinese people moved into Xinjiang, many Uighurs lost their land. In July 2009, all that growing resentment finally exploded with deadly consequences and Xinjiang's capital, Arumji. It's been three days since Bloody riots broke out, pitting ethnic Uighur Muslims against the dominant Han Chinese. The spark, two Uighur factory workers died in a brawl with the Han. Now 156 people had been killed in more than 1,000 injured, making it the worst ethnic violence this country has seen in decades. After the riots, China rounds up and arrests at least a thousand and perhaps far more young Uighur men. Odd to the teeth and were young were in Turkey at the time, and they watched the events with alarm. But like many Uighurs, they hoped the violence and the state repression would pass. They continued to build their lives. In 2011, their daughter, Isu was born, and in 2013, their son, Lutfla. But things were not getting better. Things were getting worse. The same year, Lutfla was born, several Uighurs rammed a car into Beijing's Tiananmen Square, wounding dozens of people and killing two pedestrians. Chinese authorities investigating the car crash in Tiananmen Square on Monday have named two suspects. China immediately declared it a premeditated terrorist attack, orchestrated by Uighurs with ties to international extremist groups. The Chinese government blamed Uighur militants for other attacks, too, including one in 2014, where 31 people were stabbed to death in a train station. Media reports there say several attackers boarded a train at the Kong-Mean Railway Station. There is evidence that several thousand Uighurs snuck abroad to try to train with militant groups. Some have joined Al Qaeda and ISIS, and Uighurs have been responsible for some attacks in China during the 2000s. But there was no sign extremism among Uighurs is widespread, or that they managed to set up cells in China. Still, China's response is swift and it is brutal. In 2014, China launched the People's War on Terror. China is waging a war on terror after a series of deadly attacks, many of them in Xinjiang. The government quadrupled police funding for the Xinjiang region. Soon, there was a police station on nearly every city block. Authorities also cracked down on international travel. Meryem's Chinese passport was confiscated. Like most other Chinese Uighurs, by the end of 2016, she is not allowed to travel without permission from the government. Abdul-ati says he and the children also had their Turkish passports confiscated in China, trapping them in Xinjiang. Abdul-ati says after that, he made me state in the apartment. If you wanted to go outside, you had to pass through a security check. And without an ID card, you couldn't even go into your own home. We were a bit lucky because we had a special letter from the local government. Sometimes you had to explain what the letter was to officials, or wait two or three hours to get through security checks, since it was not an official ID card. Sometimes we got angry. Sometimes we could only laugh at our situation. In part because Abdul-ati and his family don't speak English, as I was reporting the story, I relied on a weaker activist and translator for help. You can hear him asking to the teeth questions. His name is Abduwali Ayup, and he too has his own story about China's crackdown. So tell me a little bit about yourself, how do you want to be introduced? Language, rights, activists, and the writer, and former political prisoners. Like Abdul-ati and Mariam, Abduwali also lived in a room chief, Xinjiang's capital, working as a Uighur language teacher and writer. But his dream was to start a string of Uighur language kindergartens in Xinjiang, so his own young daughter and other children could learn their mother tongue and keep the Uighur language alive. This is our last point. This is our last front to stand. We will not compromise this. We shouldn't lose our language. Abduwali launched a popular website about preserving the Uighur language, but has China geared up for the people's war on terror authorities turned on him. So yeah, but at that, yeah, unfortunately, yeah, everything changed. In August 2013, Abduwali was arrested and interrogated. Teaching Uighur, preserving Uighur culture, was now seen as treason, an act of challenging party rule of Xinjiang. I was questioned, like the U.R. separatist. You are going to build the country and it's your goal. They said, no, I had never thought about it. It's really hard at the time to explain that I'm not to one who are interested in politics, who are interested in religious movement or any kind of mother language movement, but I failed to explain at the end. You'll be hearing more of Abduwali later in the story, but he spent the next 15 months in a Xinjiang prison. In August 2016, Abduwali Tiefenas family have been trapped in Xinjiang for nearly a year. Abduwali Tiefenas has one thing that's still allowed. He takes its family on a road trip through Xinjiang, driving from a room she in the north through Corla to the famous Uighur city of Hotin in the southwest. What they see shocks them. We set off from a room she and drove into Corla. On the way, we saw such a huge number of tanks. I said to myself, what a horrible thing this is. No one dared to ask why there were so many tanks. Unbeknownst to him, Chinese authorities were preparing for something top secret. It would be even bigger than the People's War on Terror. We'll be right back. Support for NPR and the following message come from Rosetta Stone, the perfect app to achieve your language learning goals no matter how busy your schedule gets. It's designed to maximize study time with immersive 10-minute lessons and audio practice for your commute. Plus, tailor your learning plan for specific objectives like travel. Get Rosetta Stone's lifetime membership for 50% off and unlimited access to 25 language courses. Learn more at Rosetta Stone dot com slash NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from Ford. Senior director Becca Anderson shares one way that Ford is serving their EV drivers. The Ford Power Promise is designed to inspire confidence for electric vehicle owners around charging at home on the road. Confidence in their battery with the eight year or 100,000 mile warranty and that they have access to electric vehicle expertise. To learn how Ford is supporting EV drivers, go to FordPowerPromise.com or your local Ford dealer. See dealer and the battery electric vehicle warranty guide for limited warranty details. This message comes from Sun and Ski Sports, offering up to 50% off premium outdoor gear this holiday season, along with free setup and binding mount for skis or snowboards purchased before December 30th. Shop in store or at sun and ski.com. Back in Beijing, I was hearing whispers about something weavers called the Black Gate. People said more and more weavers were being sent in, but they didn't come out. So I started digging and people spoke to me despite the danger in doing so. Leaked documents, internal speeches, China's own state media reports and investigative work from journalists have since illuminated the militarization of the region and a vast network of detention camps, the Black gates that China built to ensure hundreds of thousands of weavers and other ethnic minorities in Xinjiang. These detainees can be seen in this video, died, the head-shaped, shepherded into trains. Well, it's probably the largest internment of an ethnic or religious minority since the Holocaust. How this happens is outlined in meticulous detail in these secret documents, including the first China denied these camps existed. But later under international scrutiny, authorities switched tactics and started calling them vocational education and employment training centers. In this Chinese state press conference, Xinjiang regional governments spoke persons, Zui Wang, defens the camps, saying quote, the Xinjiang issue was not at all a democracy, human rights or religious issue, but is rather an issue of opposing terrorism, extremism, separatism and interference. The vocational training centers are to eradicate terrorism and religious extremism at its roots. The idea is to identify any Uyghur who's exhibited what the Chinese consider, worrying signs are sympathetic to extremism and send them to be educated and communist party ideology and Mandarin Chinese, so they can be more, quote, Chinese. The scale of these detentions appears to have shrunk in recent years, but from 2017 to 2021, the state department estimates more than one million historically Muslim minority adults were detained. Leaked government documents highlight how arbitrary such detentions were from this for example, officials in southern Caracax County and Xinjiang detained people for reasons including men having long beards, women who wore a veil and Uyghurs who deployed for a passport. Talbanwar, the young mother you heard earlier whose family is openly religious, says that by 2013, daily life became nearly impossible. Kim There were a lot of soldiers patrolling around. Some ladies started to take their head coverings off. Many isolated at home instead of going out without coverings. For fear of police, I was one of them. My life became very isolated. Anyone seen as a religious or intellectual figure in the Uyghur community was taken away. Abduelli, the translator and Uyghur language teacher, had many friends who were sent to detention or worse to prison around this time. Many had served the Chinese government as professors or public servants, but now they were seen as traders. I think the main reason is they are a pillar of Uyghur culture. They are producer of cultural products. They produce historical novels, they produce songs and they produce something related to Uyghur and something for Uyghur, they can unite, they can organize people. I think because of those reasons, because of their influence among the Uyghur population. Abduelli, Tief and his family were still in Xinjiang as the first wave of detention started unfolding. But then a curious thing happened. Authorities gave Abduelli back his Turkish passport. Abduelli, says he was deported and told not to come back to China. However, Mariam and the children, Aisou and Muthala couldn't go with him. Before he goes, Abduelli tells his family he'll see them soon. He prays they'll get their passports back and they can reunite and stumble. In the last moments before I had to leave, Lattfala went to the front door and suddenly burst into tears. He had never cried like that before. When I said I was leaving, he ignored me, but after I got into the car, he sobbed and fell down on the floor. Once he is back in Istanbul, Abduelli has helped us to stop what happens next. Mariam's arrest and her disappearance into China's detention system. The children are gone too. Abduelli has no idea what's happened to them or how he'll ever get them back, but he decides to try anyway. That journey next week on Embed. If you want to hear the next episode right now and before everyone else, go sign up for Embeded Plus. Embeded is the home for ambitious storytelling at NPR and subscribing to Embeded Plus is a great way to support that work. Embeded Plus listeners will get to hear each episode of the Black Sea early and they'll get to listen sponsor free too. Go to plus.npr.org slash embeddd or find the Embeded channel in Abble to find out more and a big thanks to everyone who has already signed up. Next week we will continue the story of Abdullah Tief Kuchar and the search for his missing family. The music you're hearing is a folk song called Nazu Güm by Uyghur musician Abduim Hait. He was arrested by Chinese authorities in 2017 reportedly in connection with a Uyghur language song he had performed. In 2019 after rumors of his death, the government released a video of the musician where he said he was in good health and under investigation for allegedly violating national laws. We should say it is currently impossible to verify Hait's well-being and whether he made the statements in the video under duress. Hait has not been heard from since. The Black Gate is a collaboration with NPR's international desk. If you'd like to hear more about the history of the Uyghur people check out the episode five fingers crush the land from our friends at the through line podcast. We've linked to it in our episode description. The Black Gate was reported by Emily Fang, Phoebe Wang, produced the episode with help from Adalina Lansianese. It was edited by Jenny Schmidt. Katie Simon is our supervising editor, our supervising senior producer Isliana Simstrom, our executive producer Is Irene Nuguchi. Special thanks to Dee Dee Skanky and Vincent Nie of NPR's international desk, fact-checking by Naomi Sharp with help from William Chase, mastering by Gile Moon, music by Romp team Arablui. Abduweli Ayup provided help with translation and interpretation, additional translation by Kasim Abduhame Kaskar. Mehmechan Jimme, Mukhadas, and Kasim Abduhame Kaskar. Did our voiceovers? Thanks also to Lee Hale, Shirley Henry, Ariana Gariblie, Gregory Warner, Dury Bouscarin, Vanessa Castillo, and the Kuchar family for sharing their story. Support for NPR and the following message come from Rosetta Stone, the perfect app to achieve your language learning goals no matter how busy your schedule gets. It's designed to maximize study time with immersive 10-minute lessons and audio practice for your commute. Plus, tailor your learning plan for specific objectives like travel, get Rosetta Stone's lifetime membership for 50% off and unlimited access to 25 language courses. Learn more at Rosettastone.com slash NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor Merrill. Whatever your financial goals are, you want a straightforward path there, but the real world doesn't usually work that way. Merrill understands that. That's why, with a dedicated Merrill advisor, you get a personalized plan and a clear path forward. Go to ML.com slash bullish to learn more. Merrill, a Bank of America company. What would you like the power to do? Investing involves risk. Merrill Lynch, Pierce Fenner, and Smith Incorporated, registered broker dealer, registered investment advisor, member SIPC.