 Hi, this is Mary, the Wees Kelly. I cannot believe it is the last day of 2024. And this is the moment. Right now, when NPR needs your support, we are a nonprofit news organization. We are dedicated to creating a more informed public through independent, honest, accurate, transparent, and fair journalism. You can read all about our code of ethics at npr.org. Those are the standards to which we hold ourselves when we bring you, consider this, and everything you hear from NPR. You listen because you care about staying informed about the community and world around you. Well, today you can help us keep this free public service available to everyone. And unlock sponsor free listening to consider this if you sign up for NPR+. It's a new way to support NPR and get perks for more than 25 podcasts, podcasts like Planet Money. Fresh air, wait, wait, don't tell me, and many more. You can join NPR+. Today, plus.npr.org. That is plus.npr.org. And if you want to make a gift today and help us out before the end of the year, you can do that at donate.npr.org. Thank you. If you are already an NPR Plus supporter, or if you support your local station, we're grateful to have your backing as we move into the new year. I don't know about you, but this was a tough year for me. I won't get into the details, but reflecting on it. I realized that as hard as it was, I'm also coming out of this year feeling stronger. And I know I'm not alone. So to kick off 2025, we asked you our listeners to tell us about some of your most challenging years, what you experienced, how you made it through, and what you can take from it into a new year. One of those listeners was Mike Ingram. We were laying in bed and we got a phone call at 515 in the morning to say that our son was at the hospital. And they wouldn't tell us anything other than he was at the hospital. In 2010, Mike and his wife Celia received the news that every parent fears most. A drunk driver speeding up I-95 northbound in Philadelphia, crossed into the southbound lanes and crashed into their son Michael's car. My son was 23 years old and athlete and had a whole lot of life ahead of him. So that's been the heartbreak of my life right there. If you had told me before my son's passing that I could live, I would say it's not possible, but we're finding ways of doing that. But Ingram did survive and he found a way to help other parents with the loss of a child. I found for me that helping other people has been a help to me. So I called up many of those parents so they could just have someone to talk to and to scream at. Because it is difficult and sometimes you have to be able to vent the anger. It hurts. Consider this, there's a lot to learn from life's hardest moments. There were really dark days in there and days that I was like nope I can't keep doing this. I can't keep doing this and I did. Coming up, runner and podcaster Ali Feller talks about how she navigated a challenging year. From NPR, I'm Wana Summers. From IXL Learning, IXL Learning uses advanced algorithms to give the right help to each kid no matter the age or personality. Get an exclusive 20% off IXL membership when you sign up today at IXL.com slash NPR. Support for NPR and the following message come from IXL online. Is your child asking questions on their homework you don't feel equipped to answer? IXL Learning uses advanced algorithms to give the right help to each kid no matter the age or or personality. One subscription gets you everything. One site for all the kids in your home, pre-cade a 12th grade. Make an impact on your child's learning. Get IXL now. And NPR listeners can get an exclusive 20% off IXL membership when they sign up today at IXL.com slash NPR. It's consider this from NPR. That times it felt like I was kind of living a double life where I was using the word cancer to mask the really hard stuff which was kind of nice is that I sort of had an out where I could just say oh yeah life's really hard right now because of the cancer and no one questioned it. No one was like well is there anything else that's hard? Ali Feller is a runner and host of the podcast Ali on the run where she talks with runners about all things running. In 2023 she was diagnosed with breast cancer invasive ductal carcinoma at the same time her marriage ended. I asked her what it's been like to navigate her cancer diagnosis. Right now it's nice to be on the cancer free side of things which is wonderful but certainly looking back to a year and a half ago. I think it went from overwhelming to scary to okay let's deal with this thing and then lots of sneaky emotions along the way some sneaky trauma and grief. How do you manage that over well? My note for me when I'm feeling particularly overwhelmed it can feel like the thing that's overwhelming me is the only thing in the room the only thing that I can focus on the only thing that I can think about and yet you have a job you have a family you have all these other things you have to navigate so you can't let it consume you. Yeah as much as I would have you know my immediate response to that is oh I cry I love crying I sit and cry I cry all the time when I'm feeling overwhelmed but you don't have that luxury if you have a job and relationships and a child which my daughter was four when I was diagnosed and so I didn't get to just sit around and cry. What I did do is I went for a lot of walks and I'm a runner running has been a huge part of my life for a long time now but for some reason when I got this diagnosis I just couldn't seem to find not the will to run but I was already going through this hard thing and running is inherently hard and I think it was just one more hard thing and so I just slowed it down and I started walking I remember the day of my mammogram and ultrasound I didn't have a diagnosis yet but we kind of had a sense that nothing good was going to come from that and I went for an eight mile walk I remember it being really hot out I remember sweating like crazy in May 2023 and just walking until I felt like I couldn't walk anymore and so that was actually a practice that really stuck with me. And about those days where you know you don't feel like being strong do you think there's merit and allowing yourself to just be out there and exist without putting on that brave face. Yeah and you know that's something that I've thought about a decent amount I don't care if people look at me and say she's brave I never got cancer to inspire anyone I have a really fraught relationship with the word inspiring because all I've done frankly in the past year is survive I've been in survival mode for a long time so yeah I don't know how I feel about the the bravery side of things I think for me the only person that I cared about seeing me a certain way is my daughter you know her opinion is the one that matters and and all she needs is for me to to show up for her and be her mom and on the absolute worst days I never stopped doing that thing if I could do nothing else on any given day I could get my daughter's lunch packed and I could do her hair and we could smile and enjoy the simplest moments together even if then I dropped her off at school and just crawled right back into bed which I did plenty of times. There is something that you wrote a while back that has really stuck with me we're writing about duality and how you had these days in the last year and a half wondering how low your rock bottom could actually go but also you talked about these moments of tremendous joy that you've also had and I wonder is there one memory or one day that really encapsulates all that for you? Oh gosh great question and there have been so many one that comes to mind because it's this time of year it was last December and so at this point I had just finished chemotherapy like three days prior. My daughter dances at the same dance studio now that I grew up dancing at which is just a super special thing to watch and it was her holiday show and at the time we were going through a divorce but still living together which was very challenging for me and so the arrangement for that day was that I would bring our daughter to her show I would get her ready and do her hair and was so excited about that and this was her first big dance performance on a stage and so I was really looking forward to it and so was she and so I brought her to the performance she did amazing and then it was her father's birthday that day and so after the show the plan was that she would go with him and they were going to go out to dinner and celebrate his birthday which is great and I was like oh you know to go from this wonderful high of you just finished chemotherapy your daughter's day dancing on the same stage that you used to dance on and she loves it and she's smiling and she's having the time of her life and you don't get to bring her home but at the same time I remember driving home that night and blasting music in my car and actually singing and I was like oh I'm gonna be okay and it was the first time throughout all of this that I actually felt not because someone else told me and not because anything magic happened just hey there was a lot of beauty in this day today and there's so much to celebrate and that I think is also important to have those days in the thick of it that remind us that we're gonna be okay even even if we're faking it until we make it which I did a lot of that too Ali given everything that you've experienced lately on the clock strikes midnight and we set into a new year what are you gonna be thinking about oh this one's gonna be my year um really all I can ask for and you know trying to manifest in 2025 is I am looking for peace ease and joy and I will also say you know there's easy and hard parts of every day there's like you said there's the duality in every single day but coming to a close on this year looks so different than a year ago I was in that dark and scary place of really being in the thick of cancer really being in the thick of divorce feeling scared and sad and angry every single day at something and now 2024 is ending and there's still some of that but my house is peaceful and even on the hard days I do feel happy every day at least at some point so you know I know I'm getting there there's a reason my daughter is named Annie I am a very firm believer that the sun will in fact come out tomorrow and so yeah I'm I'm always hanging on to that but I also can feel it I feel the peace in my house I can feel it in my body my shoulders are dropped still a lot going on still a lot that's hard still a a lot that's stressful but in 2025 I am looking for peace ease happiness joy and fun I kind of think I'm in a fun era right now and so I am enjoying that and chasing that we've been talking with Ali feller she's the host of the podcast Ali on the run Ali thank you and happy New Year thank you so much same to you the episode was produced by Brianna Scott Connor Donovan and Catherine think with audio engineering by Becky Brown it was edited by Jeanette Woods and Courtney Dorning our executive producer is Sammy Yenigan it's consider this from NPR I'm Wanna Summers this message comes from Charles Schwab when it comes to managing your wealth Schwab gives you more choices like full service wealth management and advice when you need it you can also invest on your own and trade on think or swim visit Schwab calm to learn more this message comes from NPR sponsor Rosetta Stone an expert in language learning for 30 years right now NPR listeners can get Rosetta Stones lifetime membership to 25 different languages for 50% off learn more at Rosetta Stone calm slash NPR support for NPR and the following message come from Rosetta Stone the perfect app to achieve your language learning goals no matter how busy your schedule gets it's designed to maximize study time with immersive 10 minute lessons and audio practice for your commute plus tailor your learning plan for specific objectives like travel get Rosetta Stones lifetime membership for 50% off and unlimited access to 25 language courses learn more at Rosetta Stone dot com slash NPR