 This message comes from Discover. Make your money work for you. Discover is accepted at 99% of places that take credit cards nationwide. Automatically earn cash back on purchases based on the February 2024 Nielsen report. Discover.com slash credit card. Hey, it's Amanda Aronciek. The year is almost over. You've heard a lot of pitches asking you to support NPR to the many of you who have given. Thank you. Now, if you are sick of these pitches, chances are you're a heavy podcast listener that you get a lot out of NPR podcasts like Planet Money, the indicator up first, the NPR politics podcast. In order to make all our shows possible, NPR has sponsors, sponsors slot messages into podcast episodes. You hear them every show, unless you don't. That is just one of the things we offer supporters who sign up for NPR Plus. Sponsored free episodes of more than 25 different NPR podcasts, including this one. And those sponsor messages add up. If you listen to two or three NPR podcasts each week, we could be talking about 12 hours worth of sponsor messages in a year. So just consider like what is 12 hours of your time worth? And imagine spending that on something that matters. And keeping those 12 hours. Supporting public media is a public good, especially right now. Information matters, facts matter, context and perspective matter. We know you know this. So please take a few minutes to save hours of time in the coming year and support NPR. Go to plus.npr.org, get sponsor free episodes as well as bonus episodes, merch discounts and other perks across more than 25 NPR shows. That's plus.npr.org. The link is in our episode notes too. And thanks. This is Planet Money from NPR. Hey, it's Adrienne Ma from the indicator podcast. And it's that time of the year when we get... And this is a weird request. Are we able to run a crackling fire under this whole intro? Is that possible? Oh, I'm Kenny Malone from Planet Money. Ah, yes. I can feel the warmth right now. Jeff, come on in. Come around the fire. Come on in. Come on. Thanks. Thanks guys. It's getting kind of cold out there. There's Jeffrey Guo, Jeff Guo. Great to have you here. It's so cozy in here. It is. It is. It's a time of the year where we gather with friends. Or as we do on the indicator where we gather with our Planet Money family and do what families do best around the holiday season. Engage in brutal soul-breaking arguments. Yes. In a fashion, most public. There's nothing like it. It's so, so warm and friendly. It's time for family feud. That's right. Buh-buh-buh-buh-buh-buh-buh-buh-buh. Okay, so today we have a head-to-head competition between me, Kenny and Jeff for Indicator of the Year. And then in Part 2, we've got our best predictions for Indicator of 2025. You know, one thing I do wonder, every year we do this, the sort of timer buzzer is offensively loud and maybe an OSHA violation. Can we get that checked ahead of time this year? Oh, if anything, I think we're going to turn up the volume on the buzzer. Okay. Well, the time limits must be strictly observed. Just to recap the rules, each of us will make us feel an argument for why our indicator is the indicator of the year and will only have 60 seconds or less to do it. Or else we die. Aaaay! That is too loud. Come on! And in the end, you dear listener will vote on who had the indicator of 2024. Coming up on the show, we've got an indicator. Going to the moon! I have got a nice cold beverage, content. And I'll be talking about our consumer feelings. That's all after the break. This message comes from NPR sponsor, E-Trade from Morgan Stanley. Take control of your financial future with E-Trade. No matter what kind of investor you are, their tools and resources can help you be ready for what's next. Now, when you open an account, you can get up to $1,000 with a qualifying deposit. Terms apply. Learn more at eTrade.com slash in PR. Investing involves risks. Morgan Stanley Smith-Barnie LLC. Member Sippick. E-Trade is a business of Morgan Stanley. This message comes from Schwab. At Schwab, how you invest is your choice. Not theirs. That's why when it comes to managing your wealth, Schwab gives you more choices. You can invest and trade on your own. Plus, get advice and more comprehensive wealth solutions to help meet your unique needs. With award-winning service, low costs and transparent advice, you can manage your wealth your way at Schwab. Visit Schwab.com to learn more. All right, it's family feud where we lovingly quarrel over what was the indicator of the year that just passed and where we try to predict what will be the indicator of the year to come. But let us first begin with 2024. And how this works is we're going to have 60 seconds on the clock. Each of us is going to have a chance to make our case for the indicator that best captured the year 2024. Are you each ready? Have you brought notes? Have you brought, I don't know, speedy read-throughs? What you got? I got it all up here. Adrian, why don't you then, Mr. Memory, take it first? 60 seconds on the clock. And go. Nothing captures 2024 quite like my indicator of the year, consumer sentiment. America's emotional barometer for how optimistic or pessimistic consumers are feeling about the economy. Now, in pre-pandemic times, the University of Michigan's consumer sentiment index was hovering around 100, meaning people felt okay about the economy. But for the past year, it's been down around the 70s. And this one indicator explains so much of what we saw this past year. It shows how people still felt the pain of inflation. It explains why people felt lousy about the economy despite low unemployment and rising wages. And it explains why a lot of voters wanted to ditch the Democrats and bring Donald Trump back into office. The latest consumer sentiment numbers even show how Republicans felt a surge of optimism about the economy right after the election, while Democrats felt the opposite. In short, consumer sentiment isn't just a reflection of the economy. It was a political catalyst that shaped the world we're currently living in now. Boom. Look, I'm not here to rag on other people's indicators, but I will say, in last year's family feud, I won the indicator of the year with consumer sentiment for 2023. So it doesn't devalue you doing it now. It doesn't mean that you are repeating it in uncreative. It doesn't mean any of those things. I just sometimes, the sequel is better than the original. Sometimes that's just like that our Godfather 2 was better than Godfather 1. Or toys story too. I guess they just called it the Godfather. All right. Fair. Okay, let's see if you could do better, Kenny. Yeah. What's your indicator of the year? All right, ready? Put it on the clock. Are we ready? Someone, someone give me the go. Okay, three, two, one. Total diamond hands. My indicator of the year is the price of Bitcoin. One Bitcoin at the start of the year costs around $42,000. It is now above 100. Bitcoin was created in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis. Distrust of institutions is baked into its very existence. And yet today, it's true that maybe some people are buying this because they see uncertainty on the horizon more distrust of institutions. But what seems to be more prominent in an explanation is the spike is that people assume the incoming administration is going to be very friendly to crypto, which ironically is I guess I kind of trust crypto trust in incoming institutions. Either way, I think Bitcoin is an indicator of the year because it's very existence. It's modern value is a very 2024 Worshack test for how people feel about the world's institutions and where they are headed. Thank you very much. I rest my case. Okay. Bitcoin, can I ask, I'll be honest, to that make any sense. I don't want to sound unconvinced in my own argument, but what do you think? I think you gave it away at the end there when you said that Bitcoin is a indicator of the year. No, no, no, I say that. The indicator of the year. So can you subconscious thwarting him again? No retakes. No retakes. Look, I currently do have the belt for winning the feud. And if it has to go to somebody else because I said me indicator. The way I would think about it, the way I would challenge our listeners to think about it is when in 40, 50 years, I don't know, when you're telling your grandchildren, man, 2024 was about blank. Are they going to say 2024 was about Bitcoin? They might. They might. They'll be like, we used to have a thing called fiat currency. They're like, there was something other than Bitcoin grandpa. And it'll be like, yes, yes, yes, my darling Hodel. That'll be her name. But not because of Bitcoin, because I love, because I love Fiddler on the Roof. That's all. No, you guys really neither of you. Come on. That's such a good joke. I wish Wael and we're here. She would get that. Oh my God. Well, I don't feel great about that effort. I'm going to be honest, but that's okay. Jeff, go. Let's put 60 seconds on the clock. Actually, guys, before we get started, actually a little parched. So just give me one second. I'm serious. Actually, I just need to get something real quick. Hold on. Where is Jeff? What is Jeff doing? Didn't we say, didn't we say no bits? No bits. No shenanigans. No one said that. Jeff has literally wandered off camera. Is camera? He's making us wait. I haven't, we have passed my hard out for this recording when I must go pick up my children. And yet Jeff must go get a can of soda for whatever he's about to do. Disrespectful. I am very confused right now. And that, and that, my apologies to Kenny's children. They're wonderful. So you can pay the daycare fee when we're late. Okay, so now with my ice cold beverage in hand, I can tell you about my indicator of the year, which is the beverage curve, which to be fair has nothing actually to do with beverages at all. No, it has nothing to do with beverage. It's not even spelled the same, but anyway, someone want to start the clock. Yes. Oh, that is what we were waiting for. Wonderful. There's three, two, one go. Okay, so the beverage curve, which is named after the economist William beverage, is the name that economists have for the relationship between the rate of unemployment and the rate of job openings. So for instance, usually when job openings go down, it's harder to find jobs and unemployment goes up. But, but this past year as the Fed was pumping the brakes on the economy, something weird was happening. Companies were posting fewer and fewer job openings, but unemployment wasn't really going up that much. In other words, the beverage curve seemed kind of broken. And that is a good thing because it means that the Fed has been able to tame inflation without inflicting a lot of painful unemployment on everybody. It's almost as if a lot of those disappearing job openings were just like, you know, just like, you know, deep froth on top of a carbonated beverage. Get it? Get it? Okay. Anyway, to me, that is the big story of 2024, the broken beverage curve that helped us get to this off landing. I'm happy. We got your hands over. Well, we always got the soft landing. After all of that buildup, we have happened my to have only given you 45 seconds anyway. You're lucky you got the full minute, Jeff Glow. Now that we've gotten the feud out of the way, everybody, let's go ahead, let the old fire up again. We can be cozy together and be friends because that really is what the holiday is about. It's about fighting briefly and coming back together and then dorking. And sitting in front of the chemical reaction. Yes. Yes. It's a beautiful, beautiful. Yes. All right. Listen, we've made our cases for indicator of the year. Now it is your turn to vote listeners. You can email us at Indicatoratnpr.org or you can also check out posts on Planet Money's Instagram at Planet Money and leave your choice in the comments there. Coming up after the break, we're going to make our cases for the future. What will be the next indicator of the year for the year 2025? And while we go into the break, Jeff went to throw another log on the fire. It's just getting, oh yeah. Whoa. Not that big, Jeff. She's, you know, it's not that good to have indoor fires because of the CO2 it makes people drowsy. And it also inhibits cognition. This message comes from Capella University. With Capella's flex path learning format, you can set your own deadlines and learn on your schedule. A different future is closer than you think with Capella University. Learn more at Capella.edu. This message comes from NPR sponsor, Merrill. Whatever your financial goals are, you want a straightforward path there. But the real world doesn't usually work that way. Merrill understands that. That's why with a dedicated Merrill advisor, you get a personalized plan and a clear path forward. Go to ml.com slash bullish to learn more. Merrill, a Bank of America company. What would you like the power to do? Investing involves risk. Merrill Lynch, Pierce Fenner and Smith Incorporated, registered broker dealer, registered investment advisor member SIPC. This message comes from Discover. When it comes to smart money management, one of the best pieces of advice is to make your money work for you. Well, Discover is accepted at 99% of places that take credit cards nationwide. And you automatically earn cash back on all your purchases. That means there's plenty of opportunities to make that money work. So shop smarter, not harder. Basically anywhere you go nationwide. It pays to discover. Based on the February 2024, nelson report, learn more at discover.com slash credit card. This message comes from Carvana. Sell your car the convenient way. Enter your license plate or then answer a few questions and get a real offer in seconds. Go to Carvana.com today. Okay, guys. I think we've got pretty much all of 2024's indicators cleaned up and cleared out of the closet. All the indicators gone. No crumbs. Is that what the kids say? That is sure. Let's go with that. There is one more mysteriously unmarked box here though. Just if I can take this out here and let's see. What's inside this thing anyway? If is that is that a glowing orb? Oh my God. I think we should touch it. Sure. Why not? All at the same time. Ready? Huh? Let's take three, two, one. Go! Oh no! I feel like I can see it all. The future. I've been blessed with the knowledge. Time is a flat circle. Are you seeing it too? Oh yeah. I see it. Indicators of the year ahead. Oh my gosh. Inflation expectations. The mythical are star. And global trade. Or the black thereof. Okay. So why don't we start Adrian. Why don't you start? My indicator to watch for 2025 is inflation expectations. This is an indicator that you can find in more than one place. Like the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has won. The University of Michigan has their own version. And basically what they do is they conduct a survey of consumers and ask, where do you think prices will be one year from now? Or two or three years from now, etc. Oh, ask the people the wisdom of the crowds. This is good. And yes. And Adrian, you trust the wisdom of the crowds. Yes, of course. Implicitly. No PhDs allowed in this space. I don't know if that goes into the survey. But yes. So the reason I think this is going to be an important indicator in general is that it gives us a hint about how consumers will behave in the future. If consumers believe that inflation will increase in coming months, they'll be more likely to want to spend their money now before it loses value. But also, if these consumers are spending money like there's no tomorrow, that can actually contribute to inflation and make inflation a self-fulfilling prophecy and at worst become an inflationary spiral. But I think that this indicator inflation expectations is going to be pretty important in 2025 because even though inflation has come down, we got President-elect Donald Trump who will be taking office soon. And his economic proposals have a lot of economists worried about possibly a new round of inflation, right? He's proposed tariffs, which as we've talked about in the show could make foreign products more expensive. He's pledged to carry out mass deportations of unauthorized immigrants, which could be a double whammy for businesses that employ those immigrants, right? Because if you think about industries like agriculture and construction, they could incur costs from losing employees who work for them and may have to raise wages to attract new workers and all that could also contribute to rising prices. All right, so inflation expectations, Adrian, are pretty good. Jeff, Cole, what is the glowing orb for tell in your eyes? I think, you know, we can all agree that 2024 was a big year, right? A pivotal year, the year, the path of history took a turn. The U.S. had an important presidential election, the Fed, more or less declared victory on inflation. Taylor Swift wrapped up her world tour. So there's no doubt, right, that we live in a different world now. And the big question going into 2025 is just how much has that world changed? And that is why my indicator for 2025 is the indicator of all indicators are star. Long time, planet money listeners may know that our star is something we are kind of obsessed with. It's an arguably a mythical number. And so just to give like a brief explanation, you know how like the Fed sets interest rates, right? Interest rates are like a thermostat for the economy, basically. The economy is running too hot, the Fed will raise interest rates to try to cool it down. And if the economy is running too cold, then the Fed will lower interest rates to try to stimulate it. Well, our star is supposed to be that ideal interest rate for the economy in the long term. So it's like when you finally find the perfect temperature on the thermostat where your room is not too hot and not too cold. Yeah, it's like a reflection of just your natural metabolism. And nobody actually knows what our star is for the economy. It's not something you can measure. It's more of something you predict. It's based on what you think the future economy will look like. Whether you think it'll run hot because of a lot of government spending or a lot of gains in productivity. Or if you think it'll run cold because of I don't know, aging populations or lack of opportunities for growth. All right, so these are huge, important predictors of where the economy is going and sort of how much the engine should get revved up. Yeah, but why now why in the future? Why do you think it's important now? Well, because something really interesting is happening to our star right now. You know, before the pandemic, a lot of people thought that our star was around like one to two percent. But after the chaos of the past year, the past couple of years really, people right now, they're really not sure what the future holds. Their arguing is our star maybe like three percent. Maybe it's going to go up to four percent. And I suppose it depends to some extent on what you think about the long-term consequences of, I don't know, AI and productivity, unrest in the Middle East. Of various Trump presidency policies, those kinds of big ones. Yes, yes, our star is basically everything. And right now we are at this kind of weird inflection point, I feel like, for the whole world. So in 2025, I think the big story is going to be what is our star? And just like a thermostat, nobody can seem to agree on where it ought to be set. 68 degrees at all times. Wow. Mr. Big spender over here. Okay. Let us turn to Kenny. Okay. What is your indicator to watch this year? Yes, it is my prediction, gentlemen, that 2025 will be the year of global trade, baby, or let's go global trade. It depends. We're going to see, because that is my indicator of next year. It's going to be global trade or the opposite. Yeah, just stuff moving around the world, the rate of stuff. I know it does sound like an ambiguous, not real indicator, but in fact, the World Trade Organization reports world trade numbers regularly. And of course, at the heart of watching this next year is anyone, anyone rhymes with a sense, serif. Terifs. Terifs. Terifs. Of unknown size is, I guess my point here, because President-elect Donald Trump has floated at various times, like a lot of different potential tariffs. So there was, at some time, floated a baseline tariff of 20% on all imports, 25% on goods from Mexico and Canada. And as much as 60% on goods from China, those are likely the extreme ends. We don't know for sure where the tariff numbers will land. And of course, that has me thinking a lot about anyone, anyone rhymes with cute folly, anyone. Smoot-holly. Smoot-holly. Of course. Of course. These are the infamously big and broad tariffs passed in 1930, which are then featured in a boring lecture in the movie. Ferris Bueller's Day Off, where the teacher keeps saying anyone, anyone, which is why I keep doing it. See what I was doing there, everybody. There you go. I see that in a minute. Yes, we do in a minute. But the thing is, following those enormous tariffs, global trade dropped by about 26%. It was a lot. And so for my money now, global trade is what we should be watching next year. We are nearly 100 years post-smoot-holly. The world is more globally connected than ever. And what happens when you drop gigantic tariffs into that world? And I guess how gigantic will the tariffs be? All of that will matter quite a bit. And I think it is worth watching next year. Well, we have peered into the glowing orb and we have somehow survived with all our digits intact. Speak for yourself. Oh, no, Kenny. I'm sorry. I hope it was worth it. Absolutely our pleasure. And next time, I'm going to bring sunglasses. I got to tell us ahead of time, there's going to be glowing anything. Yeah, thanks for sharing the cursed knowledge with us. I would share the curse of knowledge with you any time. These episodes of the indicator were produced by Angel Carratus and fact-checked by Sierra Juarez. They were engineered by Gillie Moon and Neil Teavolt. Kate Kincannon edits the indicator. I'm Kenny Malone. This is NPR. Thanks for listening. This message comes from NPR sponsor, Merrill. Whatever your financial goals are, you want a straightforward path there. But the real world doesn't usually work that way. Merrill understands that. That's why with a dedicated Merrill advisor, you get a personalized plan and a clear path forward. Go to ML.com slash bullish to learn more. Merrill, a Bank of America company. What would you like the power to do? Investing involves risk. Merrill Lynch, Pierce Fenner and Smith Incorporated, registered broker dealer, registered investment advisor, member SIPC. This message is sponsored by Greenlight, the debit card and money app made for families, where kids learn how to save, invest and spend wisely with parental controls built in. Sign up this holiday season at greenlight.com slash NPR. Support for this program and the following message come from Texas Mutual Insurance Company. A workers comp provider committed to protecting Texas employers by investigating fraudulent claims and preventing abuse of the system. More at Texasmutual.com slash fraud.